>> Brown: THE BROTHERS SUSPECTED
IN THE BOSTON BOMBINGS ALLEGEDLY
PLANNED TO USE THEIR REMAINING
EXPLOSIVES TO STRIKE NEW YORK
CITY'S TIMES SQUARE.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
GET THE LATEST ON THE NEW YORK
PLOT AND DISCUSS WHAT U.S.
INTELLIGENCE KNEW ABOUT TAMERLAN
TSARNAEV IN THE MONTHS AND YEARS
BEFORE THETTAC AK ON BOSTON.
>> Brown: THEN, THE U.S.
BELIEVES THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
BUT IT NEEDS MORE CONCLUSIVE
PROOF BEFORE REACHING THE RED
LINE FOR MILITARY INTERVENTION.
>> Woodruff: ALL OF THE LIVING
MEN WHO'VE EVER WORKED FROM THE
OVAL OFFICE GATHERED IN DALLAS
TODAY FOR THE DEDICATION OF THE
GEORGE W. BUSH PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARY.
WE EXPLORE HOW THESE LIBRARIES
SHAPE OUR UNDERSTANDING OF
HISTORY.
>> Brown: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
BEHIND-THE-SCENES LOOK AT THE
LOBBYING FIGHT OVER GUN CONTROL.
THAT'S ALL AHEAD ON TONIGHT'S
"NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: NEW YORK CITY WAS
REPORTEDLY GOING TO BE THE NEXT
TARGET FOR THE SUSPECTED BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBERS.
MAYOR MICHAEL BLOOMBERG
DISCLOSED THAT INFORMATION
DURING A PRESS CONFERENCE TODAY.
BLOOMBERG SAID F.B.I. OFFICIALS
LEARNED FROM DZHOKAR TSARNAEV
THAT HE AND HIS BROTHER, DECIDED
SPONTANEOUSLY TO TRY TO SET OFF
AN ATTACK TIMES SQUARE LAST WEEK
POLICE COMMISSIONER RAY KELLY
FILLED IN SOME OF THE DETAILS
AFTER BLOOMBERG SPOKE.
>> HE TOLD THE F.B.I. APPARENTLY
THAT HE AND HIS BROTHER HAD
INTENDED TO DRIVE TO NEW YORK
AND DETONATE ADDITIONAL
EXPLOSIVES IN TIMES SQUARE.
THEY HAD BUILT THESE ADDITIONAL
EXPLOSIVES AND WE KNOW THEY HAD
THE CAPACITY TO CARRY OUT THESE
ATTKS.AC
>> THEY DISCUSSED THIS WHILE
DRIVING AROUND IN A MERCEDES
S.U.V. THAT THEY HAD HIJACKED
AFTER THEY SHOT AND KILLED AN
M.I.T. OFFICER, DZHOKHAR SAID.
THAT PLAN HOWEVER FELL APART
WHEN THEY REALIZED THE VEHICLE
THEY HIJACKED WAS LOW ON GAS AND
ORDERED THE DRIVER TO STOP AT A
NEARBY GAS STATION.
THE DRIVER USED THE OPPORTUNITY
TO ESCAPE AND CALL THE POLICE.
THAT EVENTUALLY LED TO THE
SHOOTOUT IN WATERTOWN WHERE THE
OLDER BROTHER WAS KILLED IN AN
EXCHANGE OF GUNFIRE WITH THE
POLICE.
UP UNTIL THAT POINT THE TWO
BROTHERS HAD AT THEIR DISPOSAL
SIX IMPROVISED EXPLOSIVE
DEVICES, ONE WAS A PRESSURE
COOKER BOMB SIMILAR TO THE TWO
THAT EXPLODED AT THE MARATHON,
THE OTHER FIVE WERE PIPE BOMBS.
>> Woodruff: FOR MORE NOW ON
WHAT WAS REPORTED AND THE
CONTINUING INVESTIGATION, WE ARE
JOINED AGAIN BY DINA TEMPLE-
RASTON OF NPR.
TEST DINA, WELCOME TO THE
NEWSHOUR AGAIN.
JUST FELT US-- FILL US IN ON
WHAT INVESTIGATORS ARE
LEARNING THAT THEY'RE
PASSING ON.
>> WELL, IN THIS PARTICULAR
CASE, WHEN WE'RE TALKING
ABOUT THE NEW YORK PLOT,
WHAT THEY LEARNED ACTUALLY
HAPPENED IN A 16 HOUR, A
COUPLE OF MARATHON
INTERROGATION SESSIONS THAT
A SPECIAL INTERROGATION TEAM
HAD AT DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV'S
BEDSIDE.
AND IT WAS DURING THAT TIME,
BEFORE HE WAS BEFORE HE WAS
READ HIS RIGHTS THAT HE
PROVIDED SOME OF THESE
DETAILS ABOUT THE
SPONTANEOUS ATTACK THAT THEY
THOUGHT ABOUT HAVING IN NEW
YORK.
AND THEY DID HAVE THE
CAPACITY TO DO IT, AS
COMMISSIONER KELLY SAID.
THEY HAD THE BOMBS.
IT WAS A QUESTION OF WHETHER
OR NOT THEY WOULD ACTUALLY
GET ALL THE WAY TO FLORK.
AND THEY HAD A GAS PROBLEM
AND THEN ULTIMATELY THE
POLICE SURROUNDED THEM AND
ENDED UP KILLING THE ELDER
BROTHER TAMERLAN.
>> Woodruff: BUT THIS CAME
OUT YOU SAID IN THE COURSE
OF SOME 16 HOURS OF
INTERROGATION OVER SEVERAL
SESSIONS WITH THE YOUNGER
TSARNAEV BROTHER.
SO THEY WERE PIECING THE
STORY TOGETHER, IS THAT THE
WAY IT WORKED?
>> WELL, BASICALLY WHAT'S
GOING ON NOW IS EXACTLY THAT,
THAT THE FBI IS TRYING TO
PIECE TOGETHER WHAT HAPPENED
IN THE DAYS AND MONTHS
LEADING UP TO THE ATTACK.
SO FOR EXAMPLE, THERE ARE
FBI AGENTS WHO ARE NOW IN
ASIA WHO ARE INTERVIEWING
TSARNAEV'S PARENTS TO TRY
AND FIND OUT, FOR EXAMPLE,
WHAT TAMERLAN WHO HAD BEEN
IN RUSSIA FOR SIX MONTHS
LAST YEAR, WHAT HE WAS DOING
WHILE HE WAS THERE.
THEY ARE LOOKING FOR ACTUAL
GAPS IN THE SCHEDULE.
FOR SOME SORT OF INDICATION
THAT PERHAPS HE WASN'T WITH
HIS FAMILY OR FATHER.
AND MIGHT HAVE TRAINED AT A
TERRORIST TRAINING CAMP.
AND THAT WOULD HAVE GIVEN
HIM THE CA PASSIT OT BUILD
THESE BOMBS.
THEY'RE CURIOUS TO KNOW
WHETHER OR NOT THE TWO YOUNG
MEN COULD DO THIS ON THEIR
OWNS, BUILD THESE TYPES OF
BOMBS AN ALLEGEDLY WRECK
THIS TYPE OF HAVOC JUST BY
USE A RECIPE THEY MAY HAVE
FOUND ON THE INTERNECESSARY.
>> Woodruff: HOW DOES THIS
NEW YORK ANGLE SQUARE WITH
WHAT SEEMED TO BE COMING OUT
EARLIER THAT THEY DIDN'T
HAVE ANY OTHER ATTACKS
PLANNED.
FOR THEY WERE GOING TO GO TO
NEW YORK IT WAS JUST TO
PARTY.
>> WELL, THAT'S WHAT WE HAD
HEARD, THAT THE YOUNG MAN
DZHOKHAR ORIGINALLY SAID.
BUT YOU KNOW, THE WAY THIS
WORKS IS HE SAYS SOMETHING.
AND THEN THEY TRY AND CHECK
IT OUT.
HEN
THEY COME BECOME AND TALK TO
HIM AGAIN.
AND WE DID HEAR FROM THE FBI
EARLY ON THAT THEY WERE
TRYING TO CORROBORATE A LOT
OF WHAT DZHOKHAR WAS TELLING
THEM.
AND THIS WAS CLEARLYSOMETHING TL
THAT HE WAS HOLDING BACK.
AND THEY WERE ABLE TO GO A
LITTLE BIT FURTHER.
I MEAN WE DO KNOW THAT THEY
INTERROGATED THE MAN WHOSE
SUV THEY CARJACKED.
AND HE SAID THAT THEY HAD
DISCUSSED NEW YORK SO I
THINK THAT'S HOW THEY PUT
THESE TWO THINGS TOGETHER.
>> Woodruff: ARE YOU GETTING
AN UNDERSTANDING OF HOW
THESE INTERROGATIONS ARE
WORK?
ARE THEY SURROUNDING
DZHOKHAR TSARNAEV IN HIS
HOSPITAL BED AND PEPPERING
HIM WITH QUESTIONS?
I MEAN HOW IS THIS WORKING?
>> WELL, I THINK ORIGINALLY
THE FIRST 16 HOURS WHAT THEY
ARE TRYING TO DO IS ACTUALLY
BUILD A RAPPORT WITH HIM TO
TRY TO GET HIM TO TALK.
AND ONCE THEY HAD
ESTABLISHED THAT THERE WERE
NO-- THERE WEREN'T ANY OTHER
COCONSPIRATORS AND THAT THEY
DIDN'T THINK THAT THERE
WOULD BE ANY OTHER BOMBS
GOING OFF OR ANY OTHER
ATTACKS, THEY ACTUALLY MIR
ANDIZED HIM SO THEY HAD 16
HOURS OF TRYING TO ESTABLISH
WHETHER OR NOT THERE WAS A
PUBLIC SAFETY CONCERN.
AND ONCE THEY HAD SATISFIED
THEMSELVES THAT THERE WASN'T,
THEY MIRANDIZED HIM.
>> Woodruff: AND AS YOU SAID
THEY ARE NOT TAKING WHAT HE
IS SAYING AT FACE VALUE BUT
THEY DO SEEM TO BE PASSING
IT ALONG.
>> WELL, I THINK AFTER IT'S
CORROBORATED THEY ARE
PASSING IT AING LOLL.
THEY AREN'T TAKING
ANYTHING-- THE PARENT THE
THEY AN TAKINGNYTHING THE
PARENTS IN RUSSIA ARE SAYING
AT FACE VALUE OTHER.
THEY ARE SAYING THE ENTIRE
TIME TAMERLAN WAS IN RUSSIA
THEY KNEW OF HIS WHERE BEST.
AND THEY ARE SAYING THE
REASON HE WENT TO RUSSIA WAS
HE NEEDED TO GET A RUSSIAN
PASSPORT.
THAT HIS PASSPORT WAS GOING
TO EXPIRE.
HE HADN'T BECOME A
NATURALLIZED CITIZEN HERE IN
AMERICA, SO HE NEEDED A
PASSPORT AND THAT'S WHY HE
WENT FOR SIX MONTHS TO VISIT
HIS FATHER.
I MEANS THAT'S NOT BEYOND
THE PEAL, IT'S NOT BEYOND
THE REALM OF POSSIBILITY
GIVEN THAT HIS FATHER WAS
LIVING THERE AND HE WAS
THERE FOR SIX MONTHS.
>> Woodruff: SEPARATELY,
WHAT ABOUT THESE REPORTS
THAT THE RUSSIANS NOTIFIED
NOT ONLY THE FBI BUT NOW WE
LEARN TODAY THE CIA WITH
INFORMATION, WARNINGS ABOUT
THE OLDER BROTHER, TAMERLAN.
WHAT DO WE KNOW, AND WHAT
HAPPENED TO THOSE WARNINGS?
>> WELL, OUR UNDERSTANDING
IS THAT THOSE WARNINGS CAME
INTO THE FBI AND THE FBI
TOOK THEM SERIOUSLY AND
ACTUALLY-- ACTUALLY
INTERVIEWED TAMERLAN THREE
TIMES AND INTERVIEWED HIS
PARENTS AND DID A RATHER
EXTENSIVE DATABASE ON THEM.
THEY WERE TOLD BY THE
RUSSIANS IN KIND OF VAGUE
TERMS OUR REPORTING IS
SHOWING THAT HE WAS SOMEHOW
CONNECTED TO MUSLIM
EXTREMISTS IN RUSSIA.
AND HE-- THEY WERE TOLD THAT
HE WAS A THREAT TO RUSSIA,
NOT TO THE U.S. BUT TO
RUSSIA.
SO THE FBI TRIED TO RUN THIS
TO GROUND.
THEY DIDN'T FIND ANY
DEROGATORY EVIDENCE.
THEY SAID AS MUCH.
AND THEY PUT HIM ON
SOMETHING CALLED THE TIDE
LIST WHICH STANDS FOR
TERRORIST IDENTITY TERROR
MORNING DATABASE T IS THE
LOWEST LEVEL DATABASE THAT
THEY HAVE, A SO-CALLED
TERRORIST WATCH LIST.
THEY HAVE ABOUT THREE
QUARTERS OF A MILLION PEOPLE
ON IT.
SO IT IS A VERY LOW LEVEL
DATABASE.
AND HE WAS PUT ON THAT.
AND THEN AFTER THE RUSSIANS
CONTACTED THE CIA, THE CIA
ALSO SUGGESTED THAT HE BE
PUT ON THE TIDE LIST AND HE
WAS.
SO THAT, THOSE THINGS SEEM
VERY CONSISTENT.
>> Woodruff: AND RISING NOW,
CRITICISM, FROM SOME
REPUBLICAN SENATORS THAT THE
ADMINISTRATION, THAT THE CIA,
THE FBI DIDN'T DO ENOUGH TO
BE ON GUARD WITH TAMERLAN
TSARNAEV AFTER THEY GOT
THESE WARNINGS.
>> WELL, THAT IS ETH BIG
QUESTION I THINK THERE IS
PROBABLY GOING END UP BEING
SOME SORT OF INQUIRY ABOUT
THAT.
BUT THE FBI'S LINE ON THIS
IS THAT HE WASN'T DOING
ANYTHING ILLEGAL, AND THEY
DID AS MUCH INVESTIGATION AS
THEY COULD AND THEY COULDN'T
FIND ANYTHING, A PREDICATE
FOR THEM TO GO BEYOND JUST
PUTTING HIM ON THIS LIST.
AND BECAUSE OF THAT, I THINK
THERE IS SOME CRITICISM, WHY
WASN'T HE, FOR EXAMPLE, PUT
ON THE-- SLIGHTLY HIGHER
LIST.
THERE IS A HIERARCHY OF
LISTS AND A SELECTEE LIST,
THERE ARE ABOUT 14,000
PEOPLE ON THAT LIST, WE
THINK.
AND THAT WOULD BE SOMEONE
WHO WOULD BE SELLINGARILY
SCREENED AND
PERHAPS-- SECONDARILY
SCREENED AND TRACKED A
LITTLE MORE CLOSELY.
AND THE FAMOUS NO FLY LIST.
WE ALL KNOW ABOUT THAT ONE,
IT HAS ABOUT 10,000 PEOPLE
TON.
AND NO ONE KNOWS IF THEY ARE
ON THE NO FLY LIST UNTIL
THEY GET TO THE AIRPORT AND
THEN THEY'RE NOT ALLOWED TO
FLY.
>> Woodruff: WELL, THE
INVESTIGATION CONTINUES.
DINA TEMPLE-RASTON, THANK
YOU.
>> YOU'RE VERY WELCOME.
>> Brown: AND BEYOND THE
NEWS OF THE INVESTIGATION
THERE WERE POWERFUL MOMENTS
TODAY FROM A SEVERELY
INJURED PATIENT WHO SPOKE AT
A PRESS CONFERENCE AT
BRINGHAM AND WOMEN'S
HOSPITAL.
HEATHER ABBOTT, A
38-YEAR-OLD WOMAN FROM RHODE
ISLAND RECOUNTED HER
EXPERIENCE AND HER CHOICE TO
HAVE HER LOWER LEG
AMPUTATED.
DOCTORS HAD TRIED TO SAVE
HER FOOT FOR NEARLY A WEEK.
ABBOTT HAD COME TO BOSTON ON
THE DAY OF THE BOMBINGS TO
WATCH A RED SOX GAME.
SHE WAS STANDING IN LINE TO
GET INTO A BAR NEAR WHERE
THE SECOND BOMB WENT OFF
>> IT BLEW A BUNCH OF US INTO
THE BAR.
I SUPPOSE IT HIT ME BECAUSE I
WAS THE LAST ONE.
I WAS ON THE GROUND.
EVERYBODY RUNNING TO BACK OF THE
BAR.
I FELT LIKE MY FOOT WAS ON FIRE.
I KNEW I COULDN'T STAND UP.
I DIDN'T KNOW WHAT TO DO.
I WAS JUST SCREAMING SOMEBODY
PLEASE HELP ME.
AND I WAS THINKING WHO IS GOING
TO HELP ME?
I MEAN EVERYBODY ELSE IS RUNNING
FOR THEIR LIVES.
AND TO MY SURPRISE AND FROM WHAT
I'M LEARNING, I'M KIND OF JUST
LEARNING HOW I WAS SORT OF
RESCUED OUT OF THERE, THERE WERE
TWO WOMEN AND TWO MEN INVOLVED
IN HELPING ME GET OUT OF BAR AND
INTO AN AMBULANCE.
YOU CAN'T SIT THERE AND SAY WHAT
IF.
WHAT IF I ARRIVED FIVE MINUTES
LATER OR FIVE MINUTES EARLIER,
OR WHAT IF I DECIDED NOT TO GO
TO THE GAME THIS YEAR.
I THINK I DID THAT FOR A LITTLE
WHILE BUT YOU KNOW THIS IS THE
SITUATION I'M FACED WITH.
IT'S NOT GOING TO CHANGE.
SO FOR ME TO DWELL ON NEGATIVE
IS SORT OF A WASTE OF TIME FOR
ME.
>> THAT WAS HEATHER ABBOTT A
38-YEAR-OLD WOMAN FROM RHODE
ISLAND WHO HAD ONE OF HER
LOWER LEGS AMPUTATED AT
BRIGHAM A WOMNDEN'S
HOSPITAL.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR": THE POSSIBILITY OF
CHEMICAL WEAPONS IN SYRIA; THE
DEDICATION OF THE BUSH LIBRARY
AND THE LOBBYING FIGHT OVER
GUNS.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: THE DEATH TOLL
FROM A COLLAPSED BUILDING IN
BANGLADESH TOPPED 230 TODAY AND
RESCUE EFFORTS CONTINUED
THROUGHOUT THE DAY.
OFFICIALS SAID SOME 2,000 PEOPLE
SURVIVED THE DISASTER, BUT AN
UNKNOWN NUMBER WERE TRAPPED.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
JOHN SPARKS OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS."
>> Reporter: IN THE RUBBLE AND
DUST, AMIDST THE CONCRETE SLABS
AND TOPPLED SEWING MACHINES, THE
SEARCH FOR SURVIVORS GOES ON,
BUT TIME IS RUNNING OUT IN THE
REMAINS OF WHAT THEY USED TO
CALL RANA PLAZA.
IT WAS HOME TO GARMENT FACTORIES
AND A SHOPPING MALL, BUT NOW
IT'S THE SITE OF A NATIONAL
DISASTER.
IN DARK SPACES, DEEP WITHIN THE
RUINS, VOICES ARE HEARD, PEOPLE
OUT OF REACH, BEGGING FOR THEIR
LIVES.
OVERNIGHT, SOLDIERS AND FIREMEN
AND LOCAL VOLUNTEERS COMBED THE
SITE, REMOVING BODS ANIED BITS
OF RUBBLE BY HAND, BUT
SPECIALIST TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT
WERE IN SHORT SUPPLY.
STILL, THERE WERE SURVIVORS AND
SOME WERE ANGRY, CLAIMING THEY'D
BEEN FORCED TO WORK BY FACTORY
BOSSES, DESPITE THE APPEARANCE
OF CRACKS IN THE BUILDING
EARLIER IN THE WEEK.
>> Reporter: T.V. BROADCAST THE
DAY BEFORE THE BUILDING
COLLAPSED, DOES SHOW CRACKS IN
THE WALLS, AND TODAY THE POLICE
SAID FACTORY BOSSES IGNORED THEM
WHEN THEY ORDERED AN EVACUATION
OF RANA PLAZA DISASTER SITE.
THIS DISASTER RAISES SERIOUS
QUESTIONS ABOUT THE COMMITMENT
OF FACTORY OWNERS, GOVERNMENTS
AND FASHION BRANDS TO ENSURE
SAFE WORKING CONDITIONS.
THIS AFTERNOON IN DHAKA, WORKERS
MADE THEIR OWN DEMANDS IN FRONT
OF THE GARMENT INDUSTRY'S
OFFICES.
THE CALL FOR BETTER CONDITIONS
AND THEIR ANGER BOILED OVER.
SKIRMISHES WITH THE POLICE BROKE
OUT AND THREE FACTORIES WERE
VANDALIZED.
>> Sreenivasan: IN IRAQ, MORE
THAN 40 PEOPLE DIED TODAY IN THE
CITY OF MOSUL AS SUNNI MILITANTS
BATTLED POLICE.
ELSEWHERE, GUNMEN SEIZED CONTROL
OF A SUNNI TOWN NORTH OF
BAGHDAD.
THERE WAS NO IMMEDIATE WORD OF
CASUALTIES.
TODAY'S VIOLENCE MARKED THE
LATEST CLASHES BETWEEN SUNNIS
AND GOVERNMENT SECURITY FORCES
THAT HAVE KILLED MORE THAN 150
PEOPLE IN THREE DAYS.
LAST WEEK'S DISASTER AT A TEXAS
FERTILIZER PLANT BROUGHT OUT
HUNDREDS OF MOURNERS TODAY,
INCLUDING THE PRESIDENT.
THEY ATTENDED A MEMORIAL SERVICE
FOR THE 14 PEOPLE KILLED.
A LONG LINE OF FIRE TRUCKS MADE
ITS WAY THROUGH WACO, TEXAS MORE
THAN A WEEK AFTER AN EARTH-
SHATTERING EXPLOSION LEVELED
PARTS OF THE NEARBY SMALL TOWN
OF WEST.
FIREMEN AND OTHER RESCUE WORKERS
FROM AROUND THE STATE AND
COUNTRY GATHERED IN TRIBUTE TO
THEIR TEN VOLUNTEER COMRADES
KILLED IN THE BLAST.
THEY ALSO HOPED TO DEMONSTRATE
THAT WEST IS NOT FORGOTTEN IN
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S WORDS FROM
LAST FRIDAY, AMID THE BOSTON
TERROR ATTACK THAT GARNERED SO
MUCH OF THE NATION'S ATTENTION.
>> ORDINARY INDIVIDUALS BLESSED
WITH EXTRAORDINARY COURAGE.
AND A DETERMINATION TO DO WHAT
THEY COULD TO SAVE LIVES.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PRESIDENT
ATTENDED AND SPOKE AT TODAY'S
CEREMONY.
>> TODAY I SEE IN THE PEOPLE
OF WEST, IN YOUR EYES, THAT
WHAT MAKES WEST SPECIAL
ISN'T GOING TO GO AWAY.
AND INSTEAD OF CHANGING WHO
YOU ARE, THIS TRAGEDY HAS
SIMPLY REVEALED WHO YOU'VE
ALWAYS BEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: AMID THE
MOURNING, THOUGH, MANY QUESTIONS
REMAIN ABOUT WHAT CAUSED THE
EXPLOSION AT THE WEST  CHEMICAL
AND FERTILIZER COMPANY JUST
BEFORE 8:00 P.M. LAST WEDNESDAY.
IT STRUCK WITH THE FORCE OF A
SMALL EARTHQUAKE, WIPING OUT A
FIVE-BLOCK AREA AND BLASTING A
CRATER 93 FEET WIDE AND TEN FEET
DEEP.
THE SHOCK WAVE WAS FELT MORE
THAN 50 MILES AWAY.
CHEMICAL FERTILIZERS WERE STORED
AT THE PLANT, BUT ONE IS SEEN AS
THE LIKELY CULPRIT: AMMONIUM
NITRATE.
IT'S BEEN USED IN ROADSIDE BOMBS
IN AFGHANISTAN AND THE OKLAHOMA
CITY BOMBER TIM McVEIGH COMBINED
IT WITH CONVENTIONAL EXPLOSIVES
IN HIS 1995 ATTACK.
THAT BOMB CONTAINED ABOUT TWO
AND A QUARTER TONS OF THE
CHEMICAL.
THE PLANT IN WEST HAD 270 TONS
AND IT IS UNCLEAR WHETHER
FEDER, STALATE AND LOCAL
GUIDELINES FOR REPORTING AND
HANDLING THE MATERIAL WERE
FOLLOWED.
ASSISTANT STATE FIRE MARSHAL
KELLY KISTNER SPOKE ON MONDAY.
>> WE ARE STILL WORKING ON
INVENTORYING ALL OF THOSE
CHEMICALS.
PART OF THAT ACCOUNTING PROCESS
FOR ALL OF THOSE MATERIALS IS
THIS METHODICAL INVESTIGATION.
WE HAVE TO GO THROUGH IT.
>> Sreenivasan: AT LEAST SEVEN
STATE AND FEDERAL AGENCIES WERE
RESPONSIBLE FOR OVERSIGHT OF THE
PLANT.
AMONG THEM, THE FEDERAL
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH
ADMINISTRATION, WHICH HAD NOT
INSPECTED THE WEST PLANT IN 28
YEARS.
RHODE ISLAND WILL BECOME THE
TENTH STATE TO ALLOW GAY
MARRIAGE.
THE STATE SENATE VOTED LAST
NIGHT TO APPROVE A BILL TO
LEGALIZE THE PRACTICE.
IT HAD ALREADY PASSED THE HOUSE.
A FINAL PROCEDURAL VOTE WILL
COME NEXT WEEK, AND GOVERNOR
LINCOLN CHAFEE HAS SAID HE WILL
SIGN IT INTO LAW.
ON WALL STREET TODAY, THE DOW
JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE GAINED
24 POINTS TO CLOSE AT 14,700.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 20 POINTS TO
CLOSE NEAR 3,290.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JUDY.
>> Woodruff: THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION SAID TODAY IT
BELIEVES THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
HAS USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS BUT
STOPPED SHORT OF SAYING THAT THE
REGIME HAD CROSSED THE SO-CALLED
RED LINE, WHICH WOULD TRIGGER A
U.S. RESPONSE.
MARGARET WARNER REPORTS.
>> Warner: THE DISCLOSURE CAME
INITIALLY FR DEFOMENSE SECRETARY
CHUCK HAGEL, TRAVELING IN ABU
DHABI.
>> U.S. INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
ASSESSES WITH SOME DEGREE OF
VARYING CONFIDENCE THAT THE
SYRIAN REGIME HAS USED CHEMICAL
WEAPONS ON A SMALL SCALE IN
SYRIA, SPECIFICALLY THE CHEMICAL
AGENT SARIN.
>> Warner: AT THE SAME TIME, THE
WHITE HOUSE RELEASED LETTERS
USING EXACTLY THE SAME WORDS
FROM LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
DIRECTOR MIGUEL RODRIGUEZ TO
SENATORS CARL LEVIN AND JOHN
McCAIN.
IN THE LETTERS, RODRIGUEZ ADDED:
BUT HE SAID THE U.S. WOULD NEED
MORE DEFINITIVE EVIDENCE BEFORE
DECIDING TO ACT.
>> GIVEN THE STAKES INVOLVED,
AND WHAT WE HAVE LEARNED FROM
OUR OWN RECENT EXPERIENCES,
INTELLIGENCE ASSESSMENTS ALONE
ARE NOT SUFFICIENT.
ONLY CREDIBLE AND CORROBORATED
FACTS THAT PROVIDE US WITH SOME
DEGREE OF CERTAINTY WILL GUIDE
OUR DECISION-MAKING.
>> Warner: AT THE CAPITOL TODAY,
SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN KERRY
SAID THE U.S. BELIEIVES CHEMICAL
WEAPONS HAVE BEEN USED IN TWO
INSTANCES, BUT DID NOT SPECIFIC
WHEN OR WHERE.
FOR MONTHS, PRESIDENT OBAMA HAS
WARNED THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
AGAINST USING CHEMICAL WEAPONS,
IN TERMS HE FIRST USED LAST
AUGUST.
>> WE HAVE COMMUNICATED IN NO
UNCERTAIN TERMS WITH EVERY
PLAYER IN THE REGION THAT'S A
RED LINE FOR US AND THERE WOULD
BE ENORMOUS CONSEQUENCES IF WE
START SEEING MOVEMENT ON THE
CHEMICAL WEAPONS FRONT OR THE
USE OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
THAT WOULD CHANGE MY
CALCULATIONS SIGNIFICANTLY.
>> Warner: TODAY'S DISCLOSURE
BROUGHT CALLS FOR A U.S.
RESPONSE FROM LAWMAKERS IN BOTH
PARTIES.
REPUBLICAN SENATOR JOHN  MCCAIN
INSISTED THE PRESIDENT MUST
RESPOND QUICKLY.
>> THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATE SAID THAT IF BASHAR ASSAD
USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS THAT WOULD
BE GAME CHANGER, THAT IT WOULD
CROSS RED LINE.
I THINK IT'S PRETTY OBVIOUS THAT
RED LINE HAS BEEN CROSSED.
NOW I HOPE THE ADMINISTRATION
WILL CONSIDER WHAT WE HAVE BEEN
RECOMMENDING NOW FOR OVER TWO
YEARS OF THIS BLOOD LETTING AND
MASSACRE AND THAT IS TO PROVIDE
A SAFE AREA FOR THE OPPOSITION
TO OPERATE, TO ESTABLISH A NO
>> Warner: McCAIN URGED THE
ADMINISTRATION TO IMPOSE A NO-
FLY ZONE IN SYRIA AND ARM THE
REBELS.
AND IN A STATEMENT, DEMOCRATIC
SENATOR DIANE FEINSTEIN SAID:
>> Warner: UNTIL NOW, THE
ADMINISTRATION HAS SAID IT'S
WAITING FOR THE RESULTS OF AN
INDEPENDENT U.N. INVESTIGATION
INTO THE ALLEGATIONS.
BRITAIN AND FRANCE SAID RECENTLY
THEY THINK THE ASSAD REGIME HAS
USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS.
QATAR AND ISRAEL GAVE SIMILAR
ASSESSMENTS LAST WEEK.
FOR MORE ON THIS I'M JOINED BY
MARK LANDER, WHITE HOUSE
CORRESPONDENT FOR THE "NEW YORK
TIMES."
AND AMY SMITHSON, A SENIOR
FELLOW AT THE JAMES MARTIN
CENTER FOR NON-PROLIFERATION
STUDIES.
MARK BEGINNING WITH YOU, THE
WHITE HOUSE HAS UP UNTIL NOW
REFUSED TO SAY WHETHER IT
BELIEVES THE ASSAD REGIME
HAS USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS OR
THEY HAVE BEEN USED.
WHAT'S BEHIND THE WORDING OF
THIS LETTER, THE RATHER
EXPLICIT WORDING OTHISF
LETTER NOW?
>> WELL, I THINK PART OF IT
IS NEARLY THE SEQUENCE OF
EVENT WITH THE BRITISH AND
E FTHRENCH AND THE ISRAELIS,
AS YOU POINT OUT, COMING OUT
WITH MORE AND MORE EXPLICIT
STATEMENTS THAT THEY BELIEVE
CHEMICAL WEAPON APPROXIMATES
WERE USED.
THERE WAS ALSO A COINCIDENCE
OF A BRIEFING ON THE HILL
WHEN SECRETARY OF STATE JOHN
KERRY WAS GOING TO BRIEF
SENATORS.
THE WHITE HOUSE KNEW THIS
QUESTION WOULD COME UP.
AND WHITE HOUSE OFFICIALS
SAY THAT IN THE LAST COUPLE
OF DAYS, THE INTELLIGENCE
COMMUNITY HAS BECOME MUCH
FIRMER IN ITS ASSESSMENT
THAT THE WEAPONS WERE USED.
SO I THINK THERE WAS AN
EXTENT TO WHICH THE WHITE
HOUSE WAS SCRAMBLING TO
CATCH UP WITH EVENTS AND TRY
TO GET AHEAD OF THIS BY
SAYING SOMETHING THAT'S NOW
BEEN SAID BY MANY U.S.
ALLIES.
>> Warner: AND IN THE LETTER
THERE WAS AN INTERESTING
PHRASE WHICH SECRETARY HAGEL
USED TOO, WHICH HE SAID THE
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY
ASSESSMENT WAS OFFERED WITH
QUOTE VARYING DEGREES OF
CONFIDENCE.
THAT'S THAT SUPPOSED TO
SIGNAL?
>> WELL, I THINK WHAT IT
SIGNALS IS THAT THIS IS NOT
A UNANIMOUS, VERY HIGH LEVEL
OF CERTAINTY, ASSESSMENT.
WE HAVE BEEN TOLD THAT
REALLY WHAT WE ARE TALKING
ABOUT IS A RANGE OF
ASSESSMENTS FROM MEDIUM TO
HIGH.
YOU KNOW, WHICH IS TO SAY
THAT THERE'S A REASONABLE
DEGREE OF CONFIDENCE IN THE
ASSESSMENT BUT NOT A
CERTAINTY.
AND REMEMBER, THE
ADMINISTRATION IS PRESENTING
THIS AGAINST THE HISTORY OF
THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION AND
THE IRAQ WAR.
AND SOMETHING THEY LEWDED TO
OBLIQUELY IN THE LETTER TO
THE SENATORS TODAY.
SO I THINK WHAT THEY'RE
TRYING TO DO IS SHOW AN A
BUNDANCE OF CAUTION AND NOT
USE THE INTELLIGENCE TO
REACH CONCLUSIONS
PREMATURELY PARTICULARLY IN
A CASE LIKE THIS WHERE
PRESIDENT OBAMA IS ON RECORD
AS BEING EXTREMELY RELUCTANT
ABOUT BEING DRAWN INTO THE
CONFLICT.
>> Warner: AMY SMITHSON WHAT
IS SIRIN AND WHAT IS KNOWN
ABOUT THE ASSAD REGIME AND
WHETHER THEY HAVE A STOCK
AGENT.
>> IT IS A NERVE AGENT,
CREATED DURING THE WORLD WAR
II ERA.
THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT HAS
LONG BEEN THOUGHO HAVE AN
ACTIVE OFFENSIVE CHEMICAL
WEAPONS PROGRAM THAT
INCLUDES NOT ONLY NERVE
AGENTS SIRIN AND BX BUT ALSO
ONE THAT MANY MAY REMEMBER
FROM THE WORLD WAR IER AR
MUSTARD GAS.
>> Woodruff: AND WHEN THE
PRESIDENT'S LETTER OR RATHER
HIS LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
DIRECTOR LETTER SAYS THAT,
ESPECIALLY, YOU KNOW, THERE
ARE A LOT OF QUESTIONS TO BE
ANSWERED BEFORE A
DETERMINATION COULD BE MADE
TO ACT.
>> WHAT KIND OF EVIDENCE
COULD THERE BE THAT WOULD
ACTUALLY CORROBORATE, THAT
WOULD CONSTITUTE CREDIBLE,
CREDIBLE EVIDENCE.
>> IF THIS U.N.
INVESTIGATION TEAM GETS ON
THE GROUND THEY'RE LIKELY TO
BE LOOKING FOR ANY NUMBER OF
TYPES OF SAMPLES, INCLUDING
FROM ANY DEVICES THAT MAY
HAVE BEEN USED DURING THESE
INCIDENTS TO DELIVER A
CHEMICAL AGENT.
FROM FOOD AND WATER, FROM
CLOTHING, FROM ANIMALS, FROM
HUMANS, IN FACT, THE
ANNOUNCEMENT TODAY ELUDED TO
PHYSIOLOGICAL SAMPLES BUT
THEY HAVEN'T PROVIDED
CLARITY AS TO WHAT THOSE
SAMPLES MIGHT BE.
>> MARK, DO YOU KNOW WHAT
THEY'RE REFERRING TO WHEN
THEY SAID THAT THIS
ASSESSMENT IS BASED ON SOME
PHYSIOLOGICAL SAMPLES?
>> YEAH, WE HAVE AN IDEA
THAT WHAT THEY ARE TALKING
ABOUT IS SOIL SAMPLES, AND
PERHAPS OTHER PHYSICAL
SAMPLES FROM PEOPLE WHO ARE
INJURED IN THE ATTACKS.
SO THESE ARE THINGS,
PARTICULARLY IF IT WAS HAIR
OR BLOOD OR ANYTHING LIKE
THAT THAT WOULD BE VERY
HELPFUL IN DETERMINING
WHETHER THERE WAS EVIDENCE
OF A CHEMICAL ATTACK.
>> Warner: DO THEY SAY WHAT
MORE THEY'RE LOOKING FOR?
>> WELL, I THINK THE KEY
THING THE ADMINISTRATION IS
NOW LOOKING FOR IS LESS
EVIDENCE OF THE PRESENCE OF
CHEMICALS THAN EVIDENCE OF
WHO USED THEM, AND IN WHAT
CONTEXT WERE THEY USED.
AND THAT GOES TO THE SECOND
PART OF THE LETTER.
THEY NEED TO ESTABLISH WITH
A CERTAINTY THAT IT WAS THE
SYRIAN REGIME AND THAT THE
WEAPONS WERE USED
DELIBERATELY, NOT
ACCIDENTALLY.
AND THAT GOES TO THAT OTHER
IMPORTANT PHRASE IN THE
LETTER THAT THE CHAIN OF
CUSTODY OVER THE WEAPONS WAS
NOT CLEAR.
SO THESE ARE THE TYPES OF
RATHER DIFFICULT CONCLUSIONS
THAT THE ADMINISTRATION WILL
NOW PUSH FOR BOTH ON ITS OWN
WORKING WITH THE BRITS AND
THE ISRAELIS AND ALSO
THROUGH THIS UNITED NATIONS
INVESTIGATION.
>> Warner: BUT AMY SMITHSON,
9 U.N. INVESTIGATION WHICH
THE U.S. HAS CALLED FOR IS
COMPLETELY STYMIED, AS I
UNDERSTAND IT.
THE ASSAD REGIME WON'T LET
THE U.N. INSPECTORS IN, AT
LEAST NOT SO FAR.
SO IS THERE ANY WAY TO
ESTABLISH A CREDIBLE CHAIN
OF CUSTODY, AS YOU DESCRIBED
IT, AND MARKED IT.
THAT DOESN'T DEPEND ON WHAT
MIGHT BE QUESTIONABLE OR
UNCLEAR, SORT OF AGENDAS OF
THE PEOPLE WHO BRING IT TO
YOU.
IN OTHER WORDS, THAT ARE
REALLY FROM INDEPENDENT
INVESTIGATORS.
>> THAT WOULD BE A
CHALLENGE.
THE INVESTIGATION THAT THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT REQUESTED
WAS OF THE INCIDENT AT
ALEPPO.
BUT BAN KI-MOON ALSO WANTS
THE INSPECTORS TO GO TO
DAMASCUS AND HOM.
IN TERMS OF ESTABLISHING A
CHAIN OF CUSTODY, WHAT THIS
MEANS IS THE LAW ENFORCEMENT
TERM, IS THEY ARE VIDEOING
WHERE THEY TAKE THE SAMPLES.
BAGGING THEM AND TAGGING
THEM, AND VERY CLEARLY
DOCUMENTING THROUGHOUT THEIR
JOURNEY BACK TO A U.S.
LABORATORY OR A BRITISH
LABORATORY, THESE SAMPLES,
PRESERVING THEM
APPROPRIATELY.
THEN YOU HAVE CREDIBLE CHAIN
OF CUSTODY THAT WOULD STAND
UP EVEN IN A COURT OF LAW.
>> Warner: FINALLY, MARK,
BEGINNING WITH YOU, WHAT
WOULD IT TAKE OR DOES THE
ADMINISTRATION THINK IT
WOULD TAKE TO, IF THE
PRESENCE AND USE OF CHEMICAL
WEAPONS HAS BEEN ESTABLISHED,
TO ACTUALLY EITHER
NEUTRALIZE OR TAKE CONTROL
OF ASSAD'S ASSETS?
THAT REGARD?
>> WELL, THERE ARE A NUMBER
OF OPTIONS THAT THE PENTAGON
HAS PREPARED FOR THE
PRESIDENT.
THE ADMINISTRATION TODAY HAS
MADE IT CLEAR THAT WHATEVER
THEY DECIDE TO DO THEY WANT
TO DO IT IN CONCERT WITH
OTHER COUNTRIES SO IT'S
UNLIKELY TO BE UNILATERAL.
BUT THE TYPES OF THINGS THAT
YOU HEAR ABOUT RANGE FROM
AIR STRIKES ON SYRIAN AIR
KRAFLT-- AIRCRAFT AND
ARTILLERY, SO THEY RUN ABLE
TO DELIVER THESE WEAPONS.
COMMANDO RAIDS INTO THE
COUNTRY TO TRY TO SECURE
CHEMICAL WEAPONS STOCKPILES.
SO THESE ARE THE TYPES OF
THINGS YOU HEAR ABOUT.
WHAT YOU REALLY DON'T HEAR
ABOUT AND WHAT EVEN PEOPLE
LIKE SENATOR McCAIN WOULD
NOT BE ADVISING WOULD BE ANY
SORT OF A GROUND INVASION OF
THE COUNTRY.
THERE'S NO APPETITE FOR
HAVING AMERICAN BOOTS ON THE
GROUND.
SO THAT'S ALMOST CERTAIN NOT
TO BE AN OUTCOME OF THIS.
>> BRIEF FINAL WORD FROM YOU,
AMYi SMITHSON, HOW
CHALLENGING IS IT TO SECURE
SITES LIKE THIS, IN
ESSENTIALLY A HOSTILE
COUNTRY AT WAR.
>> TREMENDOUSLY CHALLENGING.
WE'RE PROBABLY TALKING ABOUT
WEAPONS THAT ARE MAN
PORTABLE, IF THEY ARE LOADED
ALREADY, IF THE AGENTS ARE
LOADED ALREADY INTO ROCKETS.
AND IT COULD BE AS LARGE AS
MISSILES.
BECAUSE THEY OBVIOUSLY HAVE
MISSILE SYSTEMS THAT ARE
CAPABLE OF DELIVERING THIS.
SO IT'S GOING TO BE A BIG
CHALLENGE TO TRY TO SECURE
IT.
BUT THERE ARE SOME INTERIM
STEPS.
AND I WOULD HOPE THAT
SOMEBODY IS CONSIDERING
GETTING DEFENSIVE MEASURES
IN THE HANDS OF SYRIAN
CIVILIANS AND ALSO THE
SYRIAN OPPOSITION.
WE'RE TALKING GAS MASKS AND
CLOTHING AND DETECTORS.
>> Warner: KIND OF BASICS.
AMY SMITHSON AND MARK LANDER,
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH
>> Brown: NOW, A NEW LIBRARY AND
A LEGACY ON DISPLAY, AS FIVE
PRESIDENTS GATHERED IN TEXAS.
MORE THAN FOUR YEARS AFTER
LEAVING OFFICE, GEORGE W. BUSH
RETURNED TO THE SPOTLIGHT TODAY.
ALL THE LIVING PRESIDENTS PAST
AND PRESENT WERE ON HAND FOR THE
DEDICATION OF HIS PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARY AND MUSEUM, ALONG WITH
NUMEROUS OTHER DIGNITARIES,
FAMILY AND FRIENDS.
THE 23-ACRE COMPLEX ON THE
CAMPUS OF SOUTHERN METHODIST
UNIVERSITY IN DALLAS ALSO HOUSES
A POLICY INSTITUTE.
IT WILL HOLD 70 MILLION PAGES OF
PAPER RECORDS, FOUR MILLION
DIGITAL PHOTOGRAPHS AND 43ARTIF.
AND AS FORMER FIRST LADY LAURA
BUSH POINTED OUT, IT DESIGNED TO
ENGAGE THE PUBLIC.
>> WE WELCOME SCHOLARS AND
STUDENTS AND THE COMMUNITY AT
LARGE TO GATHER HERE FOR
GENERATIONS TO COME.
THE CENTER IS DESIGNED TO BE
HUMAN IN SCALE, BECAUSE LIKE THE
WHITE HOUSE, PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARIES BELONG TO ALL
AMERICANS.
>> Brown: VISITORS WILL SEE
EXHIBITS HIGHLIGHTING KEY EVENTS
IN BUSH'S PRESIDENCY, INCLUDING
THE IRAQ WAR, HURRICANE KATRINA
AND THE FINANCIAL BAILOUT.
A SPACE DEVOTED TO THE 9/11
ATTACKS HAS STEEL BEAMS FROM THE
WORLD TRADE CENTER.
AS PRESIDENT, BUSH'S RESPONSE TO
THOSE CRISES PROVOKED STRONG
POLITICAL DIVISIONS, BUT NONE OF
THAT WAS IN EVIDENCTODAE Y.
INSTEAD, FORMER PRESIDENT JIMMY
CARTER PRAISED HIM FOR PROVIDING
HUMANITARIAN AID TO AFRICAN
NATIONS.
>> MR. PRESIDENT, LET ME SAY
THAT I AM FILLED WITH ADMIRATION
FOR YOU AND DEEP GRATITUDE FOR
YOU ABOUT THE GREAT
CONTRIBUTIONS YOU'VE MADE TO THE
MOST NEEDY PEOPLE ON EARTH.
>> Brown: BUSH'S FATHER-- FORMER
PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W. BUSH--
SPOKE FROM A WHEELCHAIR AFTER A
RECENT LENGTHY BOUT WITH
BRONCHITIS.
>> WHAT A BEAUTIFUL DAY IN
DALLAS.
IT'S A GREAT PLEASURE TO BE HERE
TO HONOR OUR SON, OUR OLDEST
SON.
THIS IS VERY SPECIAL FOR BARBARA
AND ME.
AND THANK YOU ALL FOR COMING.
AND TO ALL THOSE WHO MADE THIS
MARVELOUS MUSEUM POSSIBLE, WE
THANK YOU, ESPECIALLY.
AND WE'RE GLAD TO BE HERE.
GOD BLESS AMERICA AND THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
(APPLAUSE)
>> Brown: FORMER PRESIDENT BILL
CLINTON DEFEATETHE D ELDER
BUSH'S BID FOR RE-ELECTION IN
1992, BUT THEY'VE HAD WARM
RELATIONS AS THE YEARS PASSED.
>> YOU KNOW, STARTING WITH MY
WORK WITH PRESIDENT GEORGE H.W.
BUSH ON THE TSUNAMI AND THE
AFTERMATH OF KATRINA, PEOPLE
BEGAN TO JOKE THAT I WAS GETTING
SO CLOSE TO THE BUSH FAMILY THAT
SON.
MY MOTHER TOLD ME NOT TO TALK
TOO LONG TODAY.
AND BARBARA, I WILL NOT LET YOU
DOWN.
(LAUGHTER)
>> Brown: THE FORMER PRESIDENT
COMMENDED THE INTERACTIVE
APPROACH OF THE BUSH CENTER,
SOME EXHIBITS ALLOW VISITORS TO
DECIDE HOW THEY, WOULD RESPOND
IN A CRISIS.
>> AND DEBATE AND DIFFERENCE IS
AN IMPORTANT PART OF EVERY FREE
SOCIETY.
BY ASKING US TO JOIN HIM IN THE
DECISIONS HE MADE AND INVITING
US TO MAKE DIFFERENT ONES IF WE
CHOOSE, HE HAS HONORED THAT
DEEPEST AMERICAN TRADITION.
>> Brown: AND PRESIDENT OBAMA
PAID HOMAGE TO HIS PREDECESSOR
BY EXTOLLING THE DOWN-TO-EARTH
BUSH PERSONA.
>> TO KNOW THE MAN IS TO LIKE
THE MAN.
BECAUSE HE IS COMFORTABLE IN HIS
OWN SKIN, HE KNOWS WHO HE IS.
HE DOESN'T PUT ON ANY PRETENSES.
HE TAKES HIS JOB SERIOUSLY, BUT
HE DOESN'T TAKE HIMSELF TOO
SERIOUSLY.
HE IS A GOOD MAN.
>> Brown: AND POLITICS WAS NOT
ENTIRELY ABSENT FROM THE DAY'S
PROCEEDINGS, AS THE CURRENT
PRESIDENT POINTED TO MR. BUSH'S
UNSUCCESSFUL PUSH FOR
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
>> SEVEN YEARS AGO PRESIDENT
BUSH RESTARTED AN IMPORTANT
CONVERSATION BY SPEAKING WITH
THE AMERICAN PEOPLE ABOUT OUR
HISTORY AS A NATION OF LAWS AND
A NATION OF IMMIGRANTS.
AND EVEN THOUGH COMPREHENSIVE
IMMIGRATION REFORM HAS TAKEN A
LITTLE LONGER THAN ANY OF US
EXPECTED, I AM HOPEFUL THAT THIS
YEAR, WITH THE HELP OF SPEAKER
BOEHNER AND SOME OF THE SENATORS
AND MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WHO ARE
HERE TODAY, THAT WE BRING IT
HOME.
AND IF WE DO THAT IT WILL BE IN
LARGE PART THANKS TO THE HARD
WORK OF PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH.
>> THERE IS A LARGE PEOPLE
WHEN I WOULDN'T HAVE BEEN
FOUND IN A LIBRARY.
>> THE POLIT WAG KINDS BLOW
LEFT AND RIGHT, POLLS RIGHT
AND FALL, SUPPORTERS COME
AND GO.
BUT IN THE END, LEADERS ARE
DEFINED BY THE CONVICTIONS
THEY HOLD.
AND MY DEEPEST CONVICTION,
THE GUIDING PRINCIPLES OF
THE ADMINISTRATION IS THAT
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
MUST STRIFE TO EXPAND THE
REACH OF FREEDOM.
AS PRESIDENT I TRIED TO ACT
ON THESE PRINCIPLESES EVERY
DAY.
IT WASN'T ALWAYS EASY AND IT
CERTAINLY WASN'T ALWAYS
POPULAR.
ONE OF THE BENEFITS OF
FREEDOM IS THAT PEOPLE CAN
DISAGREE.
ITS-- IT'S FAIR TO SAY I
CREATED PLENTY OF
OPPORTUNITIES TO EXERCISE
THAT RIGHT.
BUT WHEN FUTURE GENERATIONS
COME TO THIS LIBRARY AND
STUDY THIS ADMINISTRATION,
THEY'RE GOING TO FIND OUT
THAT WE STAYED TRUE TO OUR
CONVICTIONS.
>> Brown: IN THE END, MR. BUSH
GAVE WAY TO THE EMOTIONS OF THE
DAY.
>> I DEDICATE THIS LIBRARY WITH
AN UNSHAKABLE FAITH IN THE
FUTURE OF OUR COUNTRY.
IT WAS THE HONOR OF A LIFETIME
TO LEAD A COUNTRY AS BRAVE AND
AS NOBLE AS THE UNITED STATES.
WHATEVER CHALLENGES COME BEFORE
US I WILL ALWAYS BELIEVE OUR
NATION'S BEST DAYS LIE AHEAD.
GOD BLESS.
(APPLAUSE)
>> Brown: THE GEORGE W. BUSH
PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARY AND MUSEUM
COST $250 MILLION TO BUILD,
RAISED PARTLY BY THE BUSH
FOUNDATION.
IT WILL OPEN TO THE PUBLIC ON
MAY 1-- ONE OF 13 PRESIDENTIAL
LIBRARIES OPERATED UNDER THE
AUSPICES OF THE NATIONAL
ARCHIVES.
WE LOOK AT LIBRARIES AND
LEGACIES NOW WITH THREE
HISTORIANS:
ELLEN FITZPATRICK OF THE
UNIVERSITY OF NEW HAMPSHIRE,
H.W. BRANDS FROM THE UNIVERSITY
OF TEXAS AT AUSTIN AND
"NEWSHOUR" REGULAR MICHAEL
BESCHLOSS.
WELL, MICHAEL, LET ME START
WITH YOU AND WITH A GENERAL
QUESTION.
WHAT'S THE PURPOSE OF THESE
LIBRARIES?
HOW MUCH DO THEY HELP SHAPE
PEOPLE'S VIEWS OF FORMER
PRESIDENTS?
>> WELL, THE MUSS SEEM PART
OF THE LIBRARY IS BASICALLY,
AND THIS IS TRUE OF MOST OF
THESE LIBRARIES, AN EFFORT
TO GIVE YOU THE PRESIDENT'S
POINT OF VIEW ON HIS OWN
PRESIDENCY, AND THAT OF HIS
PARTISANS.
SO PEOPLE COME TO SEE THOSE
MUSEUM, IT'S STIMULATING.
THEY LEARN A LOT ABOUT THE
PRESIDENCY.
BUT I THINK THEY ALL ACCEPT
IT IS LIKE WALKING INTO THE
PRESIDENT'S OWN MEMOIR.
THE PART EXCITING TO US
HISTORIANS IS THE ARCHIVES,
LETTERS, DOCUMENTS, NATIONAL
SECURITY STUFF IS OPENED AS
TIME GOES ON, THAT'S WHAT
REALLY MOVES US TO
RECONSIDER A PRESIDENT.
>> Brown: ELLEN FITZPATRICK
IN THE SPECIFIC CASE OF
GEORGE W. BUSH, HOW FIXED DO
YOU THINK IS HIS LEGACY AND
WHAT, WHAT WILL PEOPLE BE
LOOKING AT IN TERMS OF HIM
WHEN THEY LOOK AT THIS
LIBRARY?
>> I THINK THAT HIS LEGACY
IS ACTUALLY VERY FLUID.
AND IT'S POIGNANT THAT THIS
DEDICATION OCCURS AFTER THIS
TERRIBLE TERRORIST BOMBING
THAT JUST TOOK PLACE IN
BOSTON.
BECAUSE HIS PRESIDENCY AS
THE LIBRARY AND MUSEUM
ITSELF SHOWCASES, WAS DEEPLY
AFFECTED BY THE EVENTS OF
SEPTEMBER 11.
AND THE TERRIBLE TRAGEDY
THAT REALLY OVERSHADOWS HIS
PRESIDENCY.
AND IN THAT SENSE I THINK
THERE'S A POIGNANCY TO THE
TIMES OF THIS DEDICATION.
HIS LEGACY IS UNFOLDING.
AND I THINK THAT IN ALL
LIKELIHOOD OVER TIME AS THE
OPINION POLLS SEEM TO
SUGGEST, THERE WILL BE
GREATER SYMPATHY TO THE
BURDEN THAT HE BOTHER IN
TRYING TO COME TO GRIPS WITH
THE WORST PEACETIME ATTACK
IN AMERICAN HISTORY ON THE
HOMELAND.
>> Brown: WHAT DO YOU THINK
ABOUT THAT QUESTION ABOUT
HOW FIXED IS HIS LEGACY AND
WHAT ARE PEOPLE LOOK FOR IN
THIS LIBRARY AND MUSEUM?
>> I THINK THERE ARE TWO
ASPECTS OF THE LEGACY
QUESTION.
ONE IS THE AFFECT OF GEORGE
BUSH'S PRESIDENCY ON THE
UNITED STATES.
THE OTHER IS THE EFFECT OF
HIS PRESIDENCY ON THE WORLD.
THE EFFECT OF HIS PRESIDENCY
ON THE WORLD THAT IS A LONG-TERM
PROJECT AND WE WON'T KNOW
THE OUTCOME OF THAT FOR 10
YEAR, 20 YEARS, 30 YEARS.
BUT HIS LEGACY IN THE UNITED
STATES, I THINK GEORGE BUSH
IS GOING TO BE REMEMBERED AS
THE PRESIDENT, AS THE
PRESIDENT WHO PRESIDED OVER
THE END OF THE AMERICAN
CENTURY.
AT A TIME WHEN THE AMERICAN
CENTURY WAS WHEN AMERICA
KEPT GUNS AND BUTTER BOTH.
AND DURING THE BUSH YEARS WE
DISCOVERED WELL, WE'RE NOT
GOING TO BE ABLE TO HAVE
GUNS AND BUTTER BOTH AND WE
MIGHT NOT BE ABLE TO HAVE
EITHER ONE.
THE INVASION OF IRAQ IS
ALREADY BEING SEEN AS
SOMETHING THAT WAS
UNNECESSARY, AND VERY
EXPENSIVE.
AND SO PRESIDENTS INCLUDING
THE CURRENT PRESIDENT ARE
GOING TO GO VERY SLOWLY INTO
ANYTHING LIKE THAT IN THE
FUTURE.
AND THEN ON THE DOMESTIC
SIDE THERE IS THE WHOLE
BUSINESS OF THE TAX CUTS.
AND THE REPUBLICAN PARTY NOW,
AS A RESULT OF THE BUSH
YEARS, HAS SIGNED ON TO THE
IDEA THAT YOU CUT TAXES
FIRST, AND WORRY ABOUT THE
DEFICIT LATER.
THAT'S REALLY A REVERSAL OF
WHAT REPUBLICANS USED TO
STAND FOR.
>> Brown: WELL, MICHAEL, ALL
OF THOSE THINGS, OF COURSE,
ARE STILL VERY MUCH IN PLAY.
AND TO THAT EXTENT QUITE
FLUID.
YOU I THINK HAD A CHANCE TO
GO TO THE LIBRARY BEFORE IT
WAS COMPLETED, I UNDERSTAND,
BEFORE ALL THE EXHI
BUSINESSES WERE THERE.
BUT DID YOU HAVE A SENSE OF
THE PORTRAIT OF GEORGE BUSH
THAT IT WANTS TO PRESENT TO
US?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AND THE CENTER PIECE, OF
COURSE, IS WHAT HE DID TO
KEEP TERRORISM AT BAY AND
KEEP THE COUNTRY PRETTY
SAFE.
SO THAT'S AT THE CENTRE OF
IT THEY DO HAVE ONE THING
THAT IS SORT OF AN
INNOVATION, GROWING
INNOVATION OF SOME OF THESE
PRESIDENTIAL LIBRARIES WHICH
IS A THEATRE THAT YOU CAN GO
IN AND DEAL WITH SOME OF THE
DECISIONS THAT THE PRESIDENT
HAD TO MAKE.
IN THIS CASE, PRINCIPLES, DO
YOU GO TO WAR AGAINST IRAQ.
I MEAN THE ARGUMENTS FOR
BOTH SIDES.
SO THAT DOES HELP, I THINK,
EDUCATE THE PEOPLE WHO DO
COME.
IN BUT I GUESS I WOULD BE A
LITTLE BIT MORE ON THE SIDE
THAT GEORGE BUSH'S
REPUTATION IS MORE FLUID
BECAUSE AT THIS THINK A
PRESIDENT'S REPUTATION
DOESN'T REALLY BEGIN TO GEL
UNTIL ABOUT 40 OR 50 YEARS
LATER BECAUSE THAT'S HOW
LONG IT REALLY TAKES US TO
UNDERSTAND, FOR INSTANCE, IN
THIS CASE WHAT THE MIDDLE
EAST LOOKS LIKE, WHAT THE
WAR AGAINST TERRORISM LOOKS
LIKE, WHAT THE ECONOMY LOOKS
LIKE.
AND ALSO WE'LL HAVE ALL
THOSE DOCUMENTS THAT WILL
ENABLE TO US SEE THINGS FROM
THE INSIDE.
SO IN ALMOST EVERY
PRESIDENCY IT LOOKS VERY
DIFFERENT LATER ON.
>> Brown: WHAT ABOUT THE
OTHER ASPECT OF THIS, ELLEN
FITZPATRICK, I WILL START
THIS WITH YOU, THAT WE SAW
TODAY OF ALL THE PRESIDENTS
GATHERED.
IT'S THIS VERY EXCLUSIVE
CLUB.
AND YOU GET TO SEE THEM,
LISTEN TO THEM, THINK ABOUT
WHAT THEY'VE DONE AFTER
THEIR PRESIDENCY.
GEORGE W. BUSH, FOR EXAMPLE,
HAS TAKEN HIMSELF LARGELY
OUT OF THEUBL PIC EYE FOR
FOUR YEARS.
>> WELL, IT IS AN
INTERESTING POINT TO SEE
THEM ALL GATHERED TOGETHER.
I WAS THINKING TODAY THAT
THERE IS NOT A SINGLE ONE OF
THESE PRESIDENTS WHO DIDN'T
HAVE DURING THE COURSE OF
THEIR ADMINISTRATION SOME
TERRIBLY DIFFICULT AND OFTEN
VERY OBVIOUS AND
DISAPPOINTING REVERSAL THAT
THEY HAD TO COME TO TERMS
WITH.
AND THAT IN SOME SENSE OR
ANOTHER, DAMAGE QUOTE THEIR
LEGACY.
BUT I THINK MICHAEL'S POINT
IS VERY IMPORTANT.
WHICH IS YOU KNOW GEORGE
BUSH WAS QUOTED YESTERDAY AS
SAYING THAT HE WILL WAIT FOR
THE FINAL VERDICT OF
HISTORY.
HE WON'T BE AROUND TO HEAR
WHAT IT IS.
THE FACT OF THE MATTER IS
THERE IS NO FINAL VERDICT.
THAT IS, EVERY GENERATION
REWRITES AND REVISITS
HISTORY-- WELL, IT'S.
>> WE'LL BE PUT OUT OF
BUSINESS, ELLEN.
>> WELL, IT'S A GOOD THING
THAT IT IS UNDETERMINED.
BUT HISTORIANS THEMSELVES
ARE NOT ONLY SCHOLARS,
THEY'RE CITIZENS.
AND AS THEY VISIT THE PAST,
THEY COME BACK WITH NEW
QUESTIONS.
AND SO HARRY TRUMAN WAS A
PRESIDENT WHO LEFT OFFICE,
NOT TERRIBLY POPULAR.
AND WHO HAS BEEN WRITTEN
ABOUT OFTEN SINCE THEN, HIS
REPUTATION HAS IMPROVED.
IN THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS
THERE HAVE BEEN SEVERAL
BOOKS ABOUT THOMAS
JEFFERSON.
SO WE CONTINUE TO REVISIT
THESE PRESIDENTS, WE
REEVALUATE, WE REASSESS, WE
ASK NEW QUESTIONS, WE HAVE
NEW EVIDENCE.
AND IT'S A VERY, VERY
INTERESTING PART OF HISTORY
THAT IT LIVES.
IT'S A PARADOX.
WE STUDY THE PAST BUT IT
LIVES.
>> I GUESS WE SHOULDN'T BE
SURPRISED THAT A PANEL OF
HISTORIANS FINDS HISTORY
FLUID, RIGHT, AND LEGACIES
FLUID.
>> BILL BRANT, COME IN ON
THAT, WITH A QUESTION OF,
ESPECIALLY ABOUT FORMER
PRESIDENTS AND HOW THEY, HOW
THEY ACT AFTER OFFICE AND
HOW THEY ARE LATER SEEN.
>> I THINK THAT EVERY
PRESIDENT GETS A POSITIVE
BOUNCE FROM THE OPENING OF
HIS LIBRARY.
BECAUSE THIS ARRAY OF
PRESIDENTS IS THE CLOSEST
THING WE IN THE UNITED
STATES HAVE TO A PANTH ON.
AND ALL OF A SUDDEN YOU ARE
ELEVATED TO THE REALM OF
PRESIDENT.
AND IT'S A VERY SMALL AND
SELECT CLUB.
AND IN AN ODD WAY THE BEST
THING FOR A PRESIDENT'S
HISTORICAL REPUTATION IS TO
LEAVE OFFICE UNDER A CLOUD.
BECAUSE AS MICHAEL AND ELLEN
POINTED OUT, HISTORIANS ARE
INVET RANT REVISIONISTS, WE
ALWAYS ARE ASKING NEW
QUESTIONS.
AND IF A PRESIDENT LEAVES
OFFICE UNPOPULAR SOONER OR
LATER WE'LL FIND A WAY TO
CHALLENGE THAT CONVENTIONAL
WISDOM.
SO IN THE CASE OF BUSH WHO
LEFT AMID THE FINANCIAL
CRISIS 2008 AND 2009, REALLY
THERE'S NO PLACE HIS
REPUTATION COULD GO BUT UP.
>> WELL, MICHAEL, THAT IS AN
INTERESTING POINT.
I MEAN I'M NOT SURE THAT'S
THE WAY THEY WANT TO GO OUT
OF OFFICE, RIGHT, BUT THE
SUGGESTION IS --
>> THAT THEY CAN MOVE UP IN
HISTORY, HUH?
>> THEY CAN.
AND YOU KNOW YOU WERE
TALKING ABOUT EX-PRESIDENTS.
LYNDON JOHNSON WENT BACK TO
TEXAS IN 1969.
HE WAS ABSOLUTELY MISERABLE,
A BECAUSE AMERICANS WERE SO
ANGRY AT HIM OVER VIETNAM
AND BLAMED HIM FOR IT.
AND B BECAUSE POLITICS WAS
HIS WHOLE LIFE.
IT WAS A VERY DIFFICULT
WITHDRAWAL.
ONE THING YOU CAN SAY ABOUT
GEORGE W. BUSH, HE'S GONE
BACK TO DALLAS.
HE'S PAINTING, PLAYING GOLF,
HE SPENDS A LOT OF TIME WITH
HIS FRIENDS AND FAMILY THIS
IS NOT SOMEONE WHO SHOWS THE
SIGNS OF HAVING GONE INTO AN
EMOTIONAL TAILSPIN.
>> AN BILL BRANDS, YOU'RE
THERE IN TEXAS.
HE IS A SON OF TEXAS, OF
COURSE.
>> IT'S VERY INTERESTING HOW
LITTLE PRESENCE HE HAS HAD
EVEN IN TEXAS.
AND I AM WITH MICHAEL IN
SAYING THIS SEEMS TO ME
SOMEBODY WHO IS VERY WELL
ADJUSTED.
THE PRESIDENCY WAS AN
IMPORTANT PART OF HIS LIFE,
BUT POLITICS WASN'T THE SUM
OF HIS LIFE.
AND I THINK HE'S MOVED ON TO
THE NEXT PHASE.
I THINK HE'S BEEN VERY SMART
IN STAYING OUT OF THE
LIMELIGHT BECAUSE PRESIDENTS
WHO CAN'T FIGURE OUT WHAT TO
DO WITH THEMSELVES AFTER
THEY LEAVE OFFICE GENERALLY
GET THEMSELVES INTO TROUBLE
OF ONE SORT OR ANOTHER.
>> Brown: HW BILL BRAND,
ELLEN FITZPATRICK AND
MICHAEL BESCHLOSS, THANK YOU
ALL THREE, VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> THANKS, JEFF.
>> MY PLEASURE.
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN WATCH THE
SPEECHES FROM TODAY IN-FULL ON
OUR YOUTUBE PAGE.
>> Woodruff: FINALLY TONIGHT, WE
TURN TO THE POLITICAL DEBATE
OVER GUNS IN THIS COUNTRY, AND
THE DECADES-LONG EVOLUTION OF
LOBBYING TACTICS ON BOTH SIDES
OF THE CONTROVERSIAL ISSUE.
>> THE AMENDMENT IS NOT AGREED
TO.
>> Woodruff: LAST WEEK'S DEFEAT
OF A BIPARTISAN EFFORT TO EXPAND
BACKGROUND CHECKS FOR GUN BUYERS
WAS CHEERED BY GUN RIGHTS
ADVOCATES AND DENOUNCED BY
PRESIDENT OBAMA.
>> THIS WAS A PRETTY SHAMEFUL
DAY FOR WASHINGTON.
>> Woodruff: IT WAS ALSO A
SHOCKING LOSS FOR LOVED ONES OF
THE 20 CHILDREN AND SIX ADULTS
MURDERED AT SANDY HOOK
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL IN NEWTOWN,
CONNECTICUT.
THESE PARENTS AND RELATIVES WERE
PART OF A DETERMINED EFFORT TO
INFLUENCE POLITICAL CHANGE FOR
MOST, IT WAS, THE FIRST TIME.
TRAVELING TO WASHINGTON AND
DIRECTLY LOBBYING MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS.
>> NEVER IN MY WILDEST DREAMS
DID I THINK THAT I'D BE FORCED
INTO A SITUATION THAT I WOULD
HAVE TO BE ROAMING THE HALLS OF
THE SENATE BUILDING LOOKING TO
TALK TO ANY PERSON WHO WILL
LISTEN TO ME.
>> Woodruff: ERICA LAFFERTY LOST
HER MOTHER, DAWN HOCHSPRUNG, WHO
WAS THE PRINCIPAL AT SANDY HOOK.
>> SHE WAS A LEADER AND AN
INSPIRATION TO EVERYONE, HER
PARENTS AT THE SCHOOLS, THE
KIDS, AND DEFINITELY MOST
IMPORTANT TO MY SISTER AND
MYSELF.
>> Woodruff: THE LEGISLATIVE
FAILURE WAS MADE MORE STINGING
BY PUBLIC OPINION POLLS SHOWING
AS MANY AS 90% OF AMERICANS
SUPPORTED THE PROPOSAL.
IN ADDITION, MILLIONS OF DOLLARS
HAD BEEN POURED INTO TV ADS BY
GUN CONTROL PROPONENTS LIKE NEW
YORK CITY MAYOR MICHAEL
BLOOMBERG AND HIS ORGANIZATION
MAYORS AGAINST ILLEGAL GUNS.
>> DEMAND ACTION TO FIGHT GUN
VIOLENCE.
>> Woodruff: ALSO LEADING THE
ADVOCACY WERE GUNSHOT VICTIM AND
FORMER CONGRESSWOMAN GABRIELLE
GIFFORDS AND HER HUSBAND MARK
KELLY.
THE COUPLE FORMED THE POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE AMERICANS FOR
RESPONSIBLE SOLUTIONS.
>> CONGRESS MUST ACT.
LET'S GET THIS DONE.
>> PRESIDENT OBAMA AND MAYOR
BLOOMBERG ARE PUSHING GUN
CONTROL.
>> Woodruff: ALL THIS WASN'T
ENOUGH TO BEAT THE POWER OF THE
GUN LOBBY LED BY THE NATIONAL
RIFLE ASSOCIATION.
>> WE'RE FREE ALREADY.
AND AS LONG AS WE HAVE THE 2nd
AMENDMENT WE ALWAYS WILL BE.
>> Woodruff: THEY ARGUED THAT
EVEN A LIMITED EXPANSION OF
BACKGROUND CHECKS TO INCLUDE GUN
SHOW AND ONLINE SALES COULD LEAD
TO A NATIONAL GUN DATA BASE.
SOMETHING THE PRESIDENT SAID WAS
PART OF A PATTERN OF SPREADING
UNTRUTHS.
>> THE GUN LOBBY AND ITS ALLIES
WILLFULLY LIED ABOUT THE BILL.
THEY CLAIMED THAT IT WOULD
CREATE SOME SORT OF BIG BROTHER
GUN REGISTRY, EVEN THOUGH THE
BILL DID THE OPPOSITE.
>> Woodruff: N.R.A. PRESIDENT
DAVID KEENE DISPUTED THAT
INTERPRETATION.
>> OUR CREDIBILITY IS THE MOST
IMPORTANT THING WE HAVE, WHEN WE
SAY SOMETHING, IT'S BECAUSE WE
BELIEVE IT TO BE TRUE, AND WE
THINK THE FACTS AND THE EVIDENCE
SUPPORTS IT.
>> Woodruff: KEENE INSISTS THE
PROPOSED LANGUAGE WOULD HAVE
GIVEN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
BROAD NEW POWERS.
>> SO AN EXPANSION OF THE SYSTEM
WAS SEEN AS A WAY OF INCREASING
THE DATABASE THAT THEY COULD GO
TO INSTANTANEOUSLY, IF THEY
WANTED TO AND MOST OF THE
SENATORS AND OBVIOUSLY OUR
MEMBERS AND A LOT OF OUR
SUPPORTERS FELT THAT IF THEY
TOOK THAT STEP, THEY WERE COMING
MUCH CLOSER TO THE NATIONAL
REGISTRY THAT A LOT OF PEOPLE,
INCLUDING THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT, HAVE SAID THEY WANT.
>> Woodruff: JOHN GRAMLICH IS
THE LEGAL AFFAIRS REPORTER FOR
"C.Q. ROLL CALL."
HE SAYS EVEN WITH AN INCREASED
SPOTLIGHT, GUN CONTROL
PROPONENTS FACE AN UPHILL
BATTLE.
>> THEY'RE STILL EMERGING.
THEY'RE STILL NEW FACES HERE.
THEY'VE BEEN VASTLY OUTSPENT
OVER THE YEARS IN TERMS OF
FUNDRAISING, IN TERMS OF DIRECT
LOBBYING IN CONGRESS.
AND SO THEY'RE STILL LEARNING
THE ROPES HERE.
>> Woodruff: WHATEVER THE
SPECIFICS, THE GUN CONTROL FIGHT
WAS FAMILIAR TO ADVOCATES OF
ANOTHER ERA.
ALSO FRESH FROM A TRAGEDY THAT
CAPTURED THE NATIONS ATTENTION:
THE 1981 ATTEMPTED ASSASSINATION
OF PRESIDENT RONALD REAGAN.
HIS PRESS SECRETARY JAMES BRADY
WAS CRITICALLY WOUNDED IN THE
ATTACK.
12 YEARS LATER, PRESIDENT BILL
CLINTON SIGNED THE BRADY HANDGUN
VIOLENCE PREVENTION ACT INTO
LAW, HELPING CREATE THE NATIONAL
INSTANT CRIMINAL BACKGROUND
CHECK SYSTEM THAT REMAINS IN USE
TODAY.
LESS THAN A YEAR LATER AFTER
THAT THE FEDERAL ASSAULT WEAPONS
BAN WAS ENACTED.
IT WOULD EXPIRE IN 2004.
32 YEARS AFTER BEING SHOT IN THE
HEAD, JIM BRADY REMAINS BOUND TO
A WHEELCHAIR AND HAS
DIFFICULTIES WITH HIS VISION.
HE LIVES WITH HIS WIFE SARAH IN
ALEXANDRIA, VIRGINIA.
JIM, WHY DOES IT MATTER WHETHER
GUN CONTROL LEGISLATION PASSES
OR NOT?
>> WELL, WE WANT TO STOP THE
CARNAGE.
ALL THE KILLING THAT'S GOING ON.
>> Woodruff: HOW DO YOU COMPARE
THE LOBBYING THAT YOU FACED IN
THE 1980s WITH THE PASSAGE OF
THE BRADY HANDGUN BILL WITH THE
KIND OF LOBBYING THAT YOU SEE
GOING ON TODAY?
>> WE DID IT MUCH MORE
POLITICALLY, I WOULD GUESS, THAN
THEY'RE TRYING TO DO NOW.
I MEAN WE ACTUALLY WENT IN TO
EVERY DISTRICT THAT NEEDED GOING
INTO AND GOT EDITORIAL BOARD
MEETINGS AND VISITED DIFFERENT
GROUPS.
IT WAS A LOT OF FOOTWORK AND
INDIVIDUAL LOBBYING IN THE
DISTRICTS.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU THINK THEY
SHOULD HAVE DONE THAT THIS TIME?
>> WELL, THERE WASN'T TIME.
IT'S STRANGE BECAUSE YOU HEAR
AWAY, BUT THAT IS NAIVETE.
IT WASN'T GOING TO BE ABLE TO BE
PASSED RIGHT AWAY.
>> Woodruff: SARAH BRADY ALSO
SAID SHE'S SEEN A DIFFERENCE IN
THE PRO-GUN LOBBY ITSELF.
>> THEY HAVE ENTRENCHED
THEMSELVES MORE DEEPLY, I WILL
SAY THAT.
AND ARE MUCH BOLDER TODAY THAN
THEY WERE 20, 25 YEARS AGO.
>> Woodruff: REPORTER JOHN
GRAMLICH POINTS TO THE CENTER OF
THE GUN LOBBY'S POLITICAL FORCE-
- THE N.R.A. AND ITS MORE THAN
FOUR MILLION MEMBERS.
>> I MEAN THEY GOT PRETTY MUCH
EVERYTHING THAT THEY WANTED AND
SUCCESSFULLY OPPOSED EVERYTHING
THEY DIDN'T WANT IN THIS CURRENT
DEBATE.
AND IF THEY WERE ABLE TO DO THAT
AFTER SOMETHING AS HORRIFIC AS
NEWTOWN, THEN IT REALLY RAISES
QUESTIONS OF IF ANYONE IS ABLE
TO DEFEAT TO THEM.
>> Woodruff: BUT AT THE STATE
LEVEL, THE GUN LOBBY HAS
EXPERIENCED SOME DEFEATS.
DEMOCRATIC GOVERNORS IN NEW
YORK, CONNECTICUT AND COLORADO
HAVE ALL SIGNED TOUGH NEW GUN
LAWS SINCE NEWTOWN.
LEGISLATION N.R.A. PRESIDENT
DAVID KEENE SAYS HASN'T GONE
UNNOTICED.
>> THE BIGGEST THREATS THAT WE
PERCEIVE COMING AGAINST SECOND
AMENDMENT RIGHTS ARE IN THE
WE SAY, BETWEEN THE
CONGRESS AND STATE LEGISLATURES
FOR THE LAST FEW MONTHS.
>> Woodruff: THE N.R.A. HAS ALSO
WORKED TO STRENGTHEN GUN RIGHTS
IN SOME STATES.
DESPITE THEIR LOSS ON CAPITOL
HILL, BACKERS OF GUN CONTROL
LIKE JAMES AND SARAH BRADY
INSIST THEY'RE NOT GIVING UP.
>> DISCOURAGEMENT IS A TEMPORARY
THING.
YOU JUST SADDLE UP AND GET BACK
INTO THE FIGHT.
>> Woodruff: GET BACK INTO THE
FIGHT.
>> YEAH, I THINK YOU HARDLY EVER
WIN SOMETHING WITHOUT A DEFEAT
FIRST.
>> Woodruff: LAST WEEK SENATE
MAJORITY LEADER HARRY REID PUT
CONSIDERATION OF THE MEASURE ON
HOLD
BUT SAID IT'S ONLY A MATTER OF
TIME BEFORE IT'S BROUGHT BACK
FOR ANOTHER VOTE.
OPPONENTS LIKE KEENE SAY IT WILL
BE A LONG TIME BEFORE THAT
HAPPENS.
>> I THINK IT'S DEAD FOR THIS
SESSION, PROBABLY DEAD FOR THE
NEXT FEW YEARS IN THE SENATE.
>> Woodruff: WHENEVER IT COMES
UP, ANY MEASURE WOULD FACE
POTENTIALLY TOUGHER ODDS IN THE
REPUBLICAN-CONTROLLED HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES WITH BOTH SIDES
PROMISING ANOTHER ROUND OF
FIERCE LOBBYING.
>> Brown: FIND OUR COMPREHENSIVE
COVERAGE OF THE GUN DEBATE ON
OUR HOME PAGE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
AUTHORITIES SAID THE ALLEGED
BOSTON BOMBERS PLANNED TO USE
THEIR REMAINING EXPLOSIVES TO
STRIKE TIMES SQUARE IN NEW YORK
CITY.
THE WHITE HOUSE DISCLOSED THE
U.S. INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY NOW
THINKS SYRIA'S GOVERNMENT HAS
USED CHEMICAL WEAPONS, BUT IT
SAID MORE DEFINITIVE PROOF IS
STILL NEEDED.
AND THE DEATH TOLL FROM A
COLLAPSED BUILDING IN BANGLADESH
TOPPED 230, AS RESCUE WORKERS
LABORED TO REACH THOSE STILL
TRAPPED IN THE RUINS.
>> Brown: ONLINE, HOW CELL
PHONES ARE HELPING FIGHT DISEASE
IN AFRICA.
HARI SREENIVASAN TELLS US MORE.
>> Sreenivasan: ON WORLD MALARIA
DAY, WE LOOK AT HOW COMMUNITY
HEALTH WORKERS IN ZAMBIA ARE
USING MOBILE PHONES AND TEXT
MESSAGES TO IMPROVE MALARIA
DETECTION, TREATMENT AND
PREVENTION.
THAT'S ON OUR HEALTH PAGE.
AND OFFERING ONE VOICE IN THE
IMMIGRATION POLICY DEBATE,
FORMER I.N.S. CHIEF DORIS
MEISSNER SAYS HIGHLY SKILLED
FOREIGN-BORN WORKERS ARE A
LIFELINE TO THE AMERICAN
ECONOMY.
WATCH THAT CONVERSATION ON OUR
POLITICS PAGE.
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
>> Woodruff: AND AGAIN TO OUR
HONOR ROLL OF AMERICAN SERVICE
PERSONNEL KILLED IN THE
AFGHANISTAN CONFLICT.
WE ADD THEM AS THEIR DEATHS ARE
MADE OFFICIAL AND PHOTOGRAPHS
BECOME AVAILABLE.
HERE, IN SILENCE, ARE 11 MORE.
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS, AMONG
OTHERS.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.